Allow setting environment variables using the build image (#230)
buildpacks/rfcs: text/0000-build-config.md

The environment variables may ideally also take precendence over any user provided values to ensure that the operators have full control over their builders.

# What it is
[what-it-is]: #what-it-is

The RFC proposes the introduction of the following directory `/cnb/config/env.build` in build images. The directory follows the same convention as a `CNB environment directory`. The notable difference is that the environment variables sourced from this directory are applied **AFTER** processing the user-provided platform environment variables i.e. they should have the highest precedence. These variables should be available during both `detect` and `build` phases (and the `generate` phase in the future).

The operator can define this directory in the build image under `/cnb/config` or `CNB_CONFIG_DIR` if defined.

# How it Works
[how-it-works]: #how-it-works

Reference implementation available at https://github.com/buildpacks/lifecycle/pull/899/files

Examples - 

Platform Enviroment varaible: `FOO=value`
Build config: `FOO=another-value`

> Final value: `FOO=value`

Reviewer: Is it possible to include a buildpack-provided value in this example? If I'm not mistaken, the order of application is:
buildpack -> platform (behavior: override) -> builder (behavior: configurable, with default `default`)

I recall that changing the order of application would be a larger breaking change - but what about changing the platform behavior so that it is:
buildpack -> platform (behavior: configurable, with default `default`) -> builder (behavior: configurable, with default `default`)

Platforms such as `pack` could add `.override` to env var files, to keep the same behavior.

Platform Enviroment varaible: `FOO=value`
Build config: `FOO.override=another-value`
Final value: `FOO=another-value`

Platform Enviroment varaible: `FOO=value`
Build config: `FOO.prepend=another-value, FOO.delim=:`
Final value: `FOO=another-value:value`

Platform Enviroment varaible: `FOO=value`
Build config: `FOO.append=another-value, FOO.delim=:`
Final value: `FOO=value:another-value`

> In case a buildpack uses `clear-env=true` then it is up to the buildpack to resolve the user provided platform values against the values set by previous buildpacks and the build config.

Reviewer: This sentence is a bit unclear to me - if `clear-env=true` the buildpack will not see user provided platform values unless it looks in the platform directory - is this what you mean?

Author: Yup, exactly that.

- Supersedes: (put "N/A" unless this replaces an existing RFC, then link to that RFC)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

This RFC proposes an easy way to configure build images to allow specifying a `/cnb/build-config/env` CNB environment directory that allows updating the Buildpack `detect` and `build` environment based on the directory.

# Definitions
[definitions]: #definitions

- CNB environment directory: A directory that follows the conventions as defined [here](https://github.com/buildpacks/spec/blob/main/buildpack.md#provided-by-the-buildpacks)
- Operator: Owner of builders and stacks. See [CNB Operator guide](https://buildpacks.io/docs/operator-guide/).

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

Often times, especially in enterprise settings, organizations often have to update the buildpacks to use internal mirrors, proxies and other settings which can be configured easily with environment variables.

Some examples include -
- `GOPROXY`
- `PIP_INDEX_URL`
- `npm_config_registry`
- `BUNDLE_MIRROR__URL`

The buildpack logic in the Buildpacks largely remains the same, except these environment variables might need to be injected during the `build` and `detect` phases.

> The environment variables may ideally also take precendence over any user provided values to ensure that the operators have full control over their builders.

Reviewer 2: hmm, this feels unexpected

Author: This mostly provides a choice to operators. If they don't want to have a higher precedence than user provided variables, they can choose to use `VAR_NAME.default`. If they do want a higher precedence they can choose to use `VAR_NAME.override`. The reason this needs to be at a higher precedence level than the user is to allow modifying user args to conform to any buildpack security/compliance requirements. For eg. being able to prepend/append args to user provided ones or being able to override user-provided invalid arguments for variables like proxies/mirrors etc. if desired. It always allows them to give higher precedence to user provided args via `.DEFAULT`. Buildpacks are already able to do this via setting the `clear-env` flag in their buildpack.toml or choosing to override/modify input user args.

Author: Another alternative may be to introduce a `env.pre` and `env.post` folder to allow for both behaviors if that is important. But for us, being able to sanitize/mutate user input is extremely important. Sort of similar to k8s mutating/validation webhooks.

Reviewer 3: > Another alternative may be to introduce a env.pre and env.post folder to allow for both behaviors if that is important. But for us, being able to sanitize/mutate user input is extremely important. Sort of similar to k8s mutating/validation webhooks.

Would these folders be in `/cnb/platform`?

My main concern from this RFC, is "yet another way to configure the same thing". If this RFC is primarily focused on order of precedence and not portability (embedded in build image) then I'd prefer to see if we can adapt `/cnb/platform` to provide the desired behavior.

Author: @jromero it is both. The portability aspects of it are fairly important.

> Would these folders be in /cnb/platform? 

These would be folders in the build image.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The environment variables may be able to take precedence over user-provided values, if configured to, which ensures that operators can take full control over their builders if that is required.
```

Rephrases this a bit. I agree the default behavior should be to have user-specified config take precedence, but I also know operators might want or need to have control as well.

# What it is
[what-it-is]: #what-it-is

> The RFC proposes the introduction of the following directory `/cnb/build-config/env` in build images. The directory follows the same convention as a `CNB environment directory`. The notable difference is that the environment variables sourced from this directory are applied **AFTER** processing the user-provided platform environment variables i.e. they should have the highest precedence. These variables should be available during both `detect` and `build` phases (and the `generate` phase in the future).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The notable difference is that the environment variables sourced from this directory are applied **AFTER** processing the user-provided platform environment variables i.e. they should have the highest precedence. This allows them to potentially override user-specified environment variables, but that is not the default behavior. An operator must mark an environment variable as `override` to indicate it should replace a value set by a user.
```

When I first read this, I thought it would squash all my user-specified env variables, but if I'm understanding correctly the behavior is more nuanced. It won't squash them unless `override` is set. This change tries to clarify so it sounds a little less scary.

> The RFC proposes the introduction of the following directory `/cnb/build-config/env` in build images. The directory follows the same convention as a `CNB environment directory`. The notable difference is that the environment variables sourced from this directory are applied **AFTER** processing the user-provided platform environment variables i.e. they should have the highest precedence. This allows them to potentially override user-specified environment variables, but that is not the default behavior. An operator must mark an environment variable as `override` to indicate it should replace a value set by a user. These variables should be available during both `detect` and `build` phases (and the `generate` phase in the future).

Reviewer: > This allows them to potentially override user-specified environment variables, but that is not the default behavior. An operator must mark an environment variable as `override` to indicate it should replace a value set by a user.

Could you give some examples? That might help to grok it better.

> The RFC proposes the introduction of the following directory `/cnb/build-config/env` in build images. The directory follows the same convention as a `CNB environment directory`. The notable difference is that the environment variables sourced from this directory are applied **AFTER** processing the user-provided platform environment variables i.e. they should have the highest precedence. This allows them to potentially override user-specified environment variables, but that is not the default behavior. An operator must mark an environment variable as `override` to indicate it should replace a value set by a user. These variables should be available during both `detect` and `build` phases (and the `generate` phase in the future).

Reviewer: > `/cnb/build-config/env`
What about making this `/cnb/env.build`? (to be consistent with the buildpack API)

Author: @natalieparellano do we want to be able to provide a way to change the location of this directory by default? If so should we provide something specific to the env directory or `CNB_BUILD_CONFIG_DIR` as it is currently suggested. If so, should that value default to `/cnb` instead?

The operator can define this directory in the build image under `/cnb/build-config` or `CNB_BUILD_CONFIG_DIR` if defined.

# How it Works
[how-it-works]: #how-it-works

Reference implementation available at https://github.com/buildpacks/lifecycle/pull/899/files

# Migration
[migration]: #migration

N/A

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

- Increased complexity in sourcing of environment variables.

# Alternatives

> [alternatives]: #alternatives

Reviewer 2: what's this difference in this over a `ENV` directive the build image's Dockerfile?

Author: @jkutner lifecycle currently strips out all of those variables. See https://github.com/buildpacks/lifecycle/blob/4f52db0a90b5637e718328e7019bf8e592fdeece/env/build.go#L8

Reviewer: From 9/1 working group:
* a buildpack that always runs first: doesn't set env vars for detect
* `/platform/env`: overridable by the buildpack (via `clear-env`), not portable, ???
